Separation of judiciary from executive.
124B.	Functions of Commission.
CHAPTER II.	THE EXECUTIVE
243G.	Powers, authority and responsibilities of Panchayats.
243W. Powers, authority and responsibilities of Municipalities, etc. 243X.  Power to impose taxes by, and Funds of, the Municipalities. 243Y.  Finance Commission.
Administration of Scheduled Areas and Tribal Areas.
Taxes not to be imposed save by authority of law.
Finance Commission.
Recommendations of the Finance Commission.
CHAPTER II.—Public Service Commissions
Removal and suspension of a member of a Public Service Commission.
Power to make regulations as to conditions of service of members and staff of the Commission.
Prohibition as to the holding of offices by members of Commission on ceasing to be such members.
Functions of Public Service Commissions.
Power to extend functions of Public Service Commissions.
Expenses of Public Service Commissions.
Reports of Public Service Commissions.
TRIBUNALS
323A.	Administrative tribunals. 323B.	Tribunals for other matters.
Superintendence, direction and control of elections to be vested in an Election Commission.
National Commission for Scheduled Castes. 338A. National Commission for Scheduled Tribes. 338B.  National Commission for Backward Classes.
Appointment of a Commission to investigate the conditions of backward classes.
Commission and Committee of Parliament on official language.
Provisions as to Public Service Commissions.
Provisions as to the Administration and Control of Scheduled Areas and Scheduled Tribes
PART B—Administration and Control of Scheduled Areas and Scheduled Tribes.
ELEVENTH SCHEDULE—Powers, authority and responsibilities of Panchayats. TWELFTH SCHEDULE—Powers, authority and responsibilities of Municipalities, etc.
having so migrated to the territory now included in Pakistan, has returned to the territory of India under a permit for resettlement or permanent return issued by or under the authority of any law and every such person shall for the purposes of clause (b) of article 6 be deemed to have migrated to the territory of India after the nineteenth day of July, 1948.
produced before the nearest magistrate within a period of twenty-four hours of such arrest excluding the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the court of the magistrate and no such person shall be detained in custody beyond the said period without the authority of a magistrate.
any law providing for preventive detention, the authority making the order shall, as soon as may be, communicate to such person the grounds on which the order has been made and shall afford him the earliest opportunity of making a representation against the order.
Nothing in clause (5) shall require the authority making any such order as is referred to in that clause to disclose facts which such authority considers to be against the public interest to disclose.
prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in article 31A, none of the Acts and Regulations specified in the Ninth Schedule nor any of the provisions thereof shall be deemed to be void, or ever to have become void, on the ground that such Act, Regulation or provision is inconsistent with, or takes away or abridges any of the rights conferred by, any provisions of this Part, and notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court or Tribunal to the contrary, each of the said Acts and Regulations shall, subject to the power of any competent Legislature to repeal or amend it, continue in force.]
to the exercise of such rights, authority and jurisdiction as are exercisable by the Government of India by virtue of any treaty or agreement:
Conduct of business of the Government of India.—(1) All executive action of the Government of India shall be expressed to be taken in the name of the President.
3[(a) is a citizen of India, and makes and subscribes before some person authorised in that behalf by the Election Commission an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule;]
obtain the opinion of the Election Commission and shall act according to such opinion.]
(2) No member of Parliament shall be liable to any proceedings in any court in respect of anything said or any vote given by him in Parliament or any committee thereof, and no person shall be so liable in respect of the publication by or under the authority of either House of Parliament of any report, paper, votes or proceedings.
any sums required to satisfy any judgment, decree or award of any court or arbitral tribunal;
Every Judge of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal 2[on the recommendation of the National Judicial Appointments Commission referred to in article 124A] and shall hold office until he attains the age of sixty-five years:
such authority and in such manner as Parliament may by law provide.]
No person who has held office as a Judge of the Supreme Court shall plead or act in any court or before any authority within the territory of India.
2[124A. National Judicial Appointments Commission.—(1) There shall be a Commission to be known as the National Judicial Appointments Commission consisting of the following, namely:—
124B. Functions of Commission.––It shall be the duty of the National Judicial Appointments Commission to—
124C. Power of Parliament to make law.––Parliament may, by law, regulate the procedure for the appointment of Chief Justice of India and other Judges of the Supreme Court and Chief Justices and other Judges of High Courts and empower the Commission to lay down by regulations the procedure for the discharge of its functions, the manner of selection of persons for appointment and such other matters as may be considered necessary by it.]
Appointment of ad hoc Judges.—(1) If at any time there should not be a quorum of the Judges of the Supreme Court available to hold or continue any session of the Court, 1[the National Judicial Appointments Commission on a reference made to it by the Chief Justice of India, may with the previous consent of the President] and after consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court concerned, request in writing the attendance at the sittings of the Court, as an ad hoc Judge, for such period as may be necessary, of a Judge of a High Court duly qualified for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court to be designated by the Chief Justice of India.
Attendance of retired Judges at sittings of the Supreme Court.—Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, 2[the National Judicial Appointments Commission] may at any time, with the previous consent of the President, request any person who has held the office of a Judge of the Supreme Court or of the Federal Court 3[or who has held the office of a Judge of a High Court and is duly qualified for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court] to sit and act as a Judge of the Supreme Court, and every such person so requested shall, while so sitting and acting, be entitled to such allowances as the President may by order determine and have all the jurisdiction, powers and privileges of, but shall not otherwise be deemed to be, a Judge of that Court:
has withdrawn for trial before itself any case from any court subordinate to its authority and has in such trial convicted the accused person and sentenced him to death; or
Special leave to appeal by the Supreme Court.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, the Supreme Court may, in its discretion, grant special leave to appeal from any judgment, decree, determination, sentence or order in any cause or matter passed or made by any court or tribunal in the territory of India.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply to any judgment, determination, sentence or order passed or made by any court or tribunal constituted by or under any law relating to the Armed Forces.
Chapter II.—The Executive
be deemed to transfer to the Governor any functions conferred by any existing law on any other authority; or
2[(a) is a citizen of India, and makes and subscribes before some person authorised in that behalf by the Election Commission an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule;]
obtain the opinion of the Election Commission and shall act according to such opinion.]
any sums required to satisfy any judgment, decree or award of any court or arbitral tribunal;
Transfer of a Judge from one High Court to another.—(1) The President may, 1[on the recommendation of the National Judicial Appointments Commission referred to in article 124A], transfer a Judge from one High Court to any other High Court 2***.
of arrears of work therein, it appears to the President that the number of the Judges of that Court should be for the time being increased, 1[the President may, in consultation with the National Judicial Appointments Commission, appoint] duly qualified persons to be additional Judges of the Court for such period not exceeding two years as he may specify.
When any Judge of a High Court other than the Chief Justice is by reason of absence or for any other reason unable to perform the duties of his office or is appointed to act temporarily as Chief Justice, 1[the President may, in consultation with the National Judicial Appointments Commission, appoint] a duly qualified person to act as a Judge of that Court until the permanent Judge has resumed his duties.
2[226. Power of High Courts to issue certain writs.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in article 32 3***, every High Court shall have power, throughout the territories in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction, to issue to any person or authority, including in appropriate cases, any Government, within those territories directions, orders or writs, including 4[writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari, or any of them, for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by Part III and for any other purpose.]
(2) The power conferred by clause (1) to issue directions, orders or writs to any Government, authority or person may also be exercised by any High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to the territories within which the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises for the exercise of such power,
notwithstanding that the seat of such Government or authority or the residence of such person is not within those territories.
Power of superintendence over all courts by the High Court.— 4[(1) Every High Court shall have superintendence over all courts and tribunals throughout the territories in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction.]
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to confer on a High Court powers of superintendence over any court or tribunal constituted by or under any law relating to the Armed Forces.
that a situation has arisen in which the administration of the National Capital Territory cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of article 239AA or of any law made in pursuance of that article; or
that for the proper administration of the National Capital Territory it is necessary or expedient so to do,
243G. Powers, authority and responsibilities of Panchayats.—
any other matter referred to the Finance Commission by the Governor in the interests of sound finance of the Panchayats.
of the Commission, the qualifications which shall be requisite for appointment as members thereof and the manner in which they shall be selected.
In this article, “a transitional area”, “a smaller urban area” or “a larger urban area” means such area as the Governor may, having regard to the population of the area, the density of the population therein, the revenue generated for local administration, the percentage of employment in non- agricultural activities, the economic importance or such other factors as he may deem fit, specify by public notification for the purposes of this Part.
persons having special knowledge or experience in Municipal administration;
the Municipalities with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self-government and such law may contain provisions for the devolution of powers and responsibilities upon Municipalities, subject to such conditions as may be specified therein, with respect to—
the Committees with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to carry out the responsibilities conferred upon them including those in relation to the matters listed in the Twelfth Schedule.
243Y. Finance Commission.—(1) The Finance Commission constituted under article 243I shall also review the financial position of the Municipalities and make recommendations to the Governor as to—
any other matter referred to the Finance Commission by the Governor in the interests of sound finance of the Municipalities.
1[264. Interpretation.—In this Part, “Finance Commission” means a Finance Commission constituted under article 280.]
Taxes not to be imposed save by authority of law.—No tax shall be levied or collected except by authority of law.
until a Finance Commission has been constituted, prescribed by the President by order, and
after a Finance Commission has been constituted, prescribed by the President by order after considering the recommendations of the Finance Commission.]
Provided that after a Finance Commission has been constituted no order shall be made under this clause by the President except after considering the recommendations of the Finance Commission.
Parliament may by law determine the qualifications which shall be requisite for appointment as members of the Commission and the manner in which they shall be selected.
It shall be the duty of the Commission to make recommendations to the President as to—
3[(d)] any other matter referred to the Commission by the President in the interests of sound finance.
The Commission shall determine their procedure and shall have such powers in the performance of their functions as Parliament may by law confer on them.
Recommendations of the Finance Commission.—The President
Appointment of authority for carrying out the purposes of articles 301 to 304.—Parliament may by law appoint such authority as it considers appropriate for carrying out the purposes of articles 301, 302, 303 and 304, and confer on the authority so appointed such powers and such duties as it thinks necessary.
where the authority empowered to dismiss or remove a person or to reduce him in rank is satisfied that for some reason, to be recorded by that authority in writing, it is not reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry; or
If, in respect of any such person as aforesaid, a question arises whether it is reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry as is referred to in clause (2), the decision thereon of the authority empowered to dismiss or remove such person or to reduce him in rank shall be final.]
Chapter II.— Public Service Commissions
a member of a Public Service Commission may be removed from his office in the manner provided in clause (1) or clause (3) of article 317.
A person who holds office as a member of a Public Service Commission shall, on the expiration of his term of office, be ineligible for re-appointment to that office.
Removal and suspension of a member of a Public Service Commission.—(1) Subject to the provisions of clause (3), the Chairman or any other member of a Public Service Commission shall only be removed from his office by order of the President on the ground of misbehaviour after the Supreme Court, on reference being made to it by the President, has, on inquiry held in accordance with the procedure prescribed in that behalf under article 145, reported that the Chairman or such other member, as the case may be, ought on any such ground to be removed.
Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), the President may by order remove from office the Chairman or any other member of a Public Service Commission if the Chairman or such other member, as the case may be,—
determine the number of members of the Commission and their conditions of service; and
make provision with respect to the number of members of the staff of the Commission and their conditions of service:
Provided that the conditions of service of a member of a Public Service Commission shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.
Prohibition as to the holding of offices by members of Commission on ceasing to be such members.—On ceasing to hold office—
Nothing in clause (3) shall require a Public Service Commission to be consulted as respects the manner in which any provision referred to in clause (4) of article 16 may be made or as respects the manner in which effect may be given to the provisions of article 335.
TRIBUNALS
specify the jurisdiction, powers (including the power to punish for contempt) and authority which may be exercised by each of the said tribunals;
provide for the procedure (including provisions as to limitation and rules of evidence) to be followed by the said tribunals;
contain such supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions (including provisions as to fees) as Parliament may deem necessary for the effective functioning of, and for the speedy disposal of cases by, and the enforcement of the orders of, such tribunals.
(Part XIVA.—Tribunals)
(Part XIVA.—Tribunals)
provide for the establishment of a hierarchy of tribunals;
specify the jurisdiction, powers (including the power to punish for contempt) and authority which may be exercised by each of the said tribunals;
provide for the procedure (including provisions as to limitation and rules of evidence) to be followed by the said tribunals;
exclude the jurisdiction of all courts, except the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under article 136, with respect to all or any of the matters falling within the jurisdiction of the said tribunals;
contain such supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions (including provisions as to fees) as the appropriate Legislature may deem necessary for the effective functioning of, and for the speedy disposal of cases by, and the enforcement of the orders of, such tribunals.
The Election Commission shall consist of the Chief Election Commissioner and such number of other Election Commissioners, if any, as the President may from time to time fix and the appointment of the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners shall, subject to the provisions of any law made in that behalf by Parliament, be made by the President.
When any other Election Commissioner is so appointed the Chief Election Commissioner shall act as the Chairman of the Election Commission.
Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the conditions of service and tenure of office of the Election Commissioners and the Regional Commissioners shall be such as the President may by rule determine:
Provided that the Chief Election Commissioner shall not be removed from his office except in like manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of the Supreme Court and the conditions of service of the Chief Election Commissioner shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment:
Provided further that any other Election Commissioner or a Regional Commissioner shall not be removed from office except on the recommendation of the Chief Election Commissioner.
1[National Commission for Scheduled Castes].—2[3[(1) There
shall be a Commission for the Scheduled Castes to be known as the National Commission for the Scheduled Castes.
Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by Parliament, the Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other Members and the conditions of service and tenure of office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members so appointed shall be such as the President may by rule determine.]
The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal.
The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
It shall be the duty of the Commission—
to present to the President, annually and at such other times as the Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those safeguards;
issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents;
4[338A. National Commission for Scheduled Tribes.—(1) There shall be a Commission for the Scheduled Tribes to be known as the National Commission for the Scheduled Tribes.
Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by Parliament, the Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other Members and the conditions of service and tenure of office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members so appointed shall be such as the President may by rule determine.
The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal.
The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
It shall be the duty of the Commission—
to present to the President, annually and at such other times as the Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those safeguards;
The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in
issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents;
1[338B. National Commission for Backward Classes.—(1) There shall be a Commission for the socially and educationally backward classes to be known as the National Commission for Backward Classes.
Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by Parliament, the Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other Members and the conditions of service and tenure of office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members so appointed shall be such as the President may by rule determine.
The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal.
The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
It shall be the duty of the Commission—
to present to the President, annually and at such other times as the Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those safeguards;
issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents;
The order may define the composition, powers and procedure of the Commission and may contain such incidental or ancillary provisions as the President may consider necessary or desirable.
A Commission so appointed shall investigate the matters referred to them and present to the President a report setting out the facts as found by them and making such recommendations as they think proper.
It shall be the duty of the Commission to make recommendations to the President as to—
In making their recommendations under clause (2), the Commission shall have due regard to the industrial, cultural and scientific advancement of India, and the just claims and the interests of persons belonging to the non-Hindi speaking areas in regard to the public services.
It shall be the duty of the Committee to examine the recommendations of the Commission constituted under clause (1) and to report to the President their opinion thereon.
to any executive action taken otherwise than under a law containing such a recital.]
to any executive action taken otherwise than under a law containing such a recital.]
Provided that the conduct of the President may be brought under review by any court, tribunal or body appointed or designated by either House of Parliament for the investigation of a charge under article 61:
Provided that the Deputy Commissioner of the Tuensang district shall be the Chairman ex officio of the regional council and the Vice- Chairman of the regional council shall be elected by the members thereof from amongst themselves;
the administration of the Tuensang district shall be carried on by the Governor;
authorise the Administrative Tribunal to receive representations for the redress of grievances relating to any matter within its jurisdiction as the President may specify in the order and to make such orders thereon as the Administrative Tribunal deems fit;
contain such provisions with respect to the powers and authorities and procedure of the Administrative Tribunal (including provisions with respect to the powers of the Administrative Tribunal to punish for contempt of itself) as the President may deem necessary;
provide for the transfer to the Administrative Tribunal of such classes of proceedings, being proceedings relating to matters within its jurisdiction and pending before any court (other than the Supreme Court) or tribunal or other authority immediately before the commencement of such order, as may be specified in the order;
If the President is satisfied that the continued existence of the Administrative Tribunal is not necessary, the President may by order abolish the Administrative Tribunal and make such provisions in such order as he may deem fit for the transfer and disposal of cases pending before the Tribunal immediately before such abolition.
Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority,—
to prevent any competent Legislature or other competent authority from repealing or amending any law adapted or modified by the President under the said clause.
Nothing in clause (1) shall be deemed to prevent a competent Legislature or other competent authority from repealing or amending any law adapted or modified by the President under the said clause.]
2[394A. Authoritative text in the Hindi language.—(1) The President shall cause to be published under his authority,—
Provisions as to the Administration and Control of Scheduled Areas and Scheduled Tribes
Administration and Control of Scheduled Areas and
, (e) and (f) of this sub-paragraph except after consideration of the report of a Commission appointed under sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 14 of this Schedule:
Subject to the provisions of this Schedule, the administration of an autonomous district shall, in so far as it is not vested under this Schedule in any Regional Council within such district, be vested in the District Council for such district and the administration of an autonomous region shall be vested in the Regional Council for such region.
In an autonomous district with Regional Councils, the District Council shall have only such powers with respect to the areas under the authority of the Regional Council as may be delegated to it by the Regional Council in addition to the powers conferred on it by this Schedule with respect to such areas.
generally all matters relating to the transaction of business pertaining to the administration of the district or region, as the case may be:
respect of all areas within such region and the District Council for an autonomous district in respect of all areas within the district except those which are under the authority of Regional Councils, if any, within the district shall have power to make laws with respect to—
any other matter relating to village or town administration, including village or town police and public health and sanitation;
The Regional Council for an autonomous region in respect of areas within such region and the District Council for an autonomous district in respect of all areas in the district except those which are under the authority of Regional Councils, if any, within the district, shall have power to levy and collect taxes on lands and buildings, and tolls on persons resident within such areas.
214. Appointment of Commission to inquire into and report on the administration of autonomous districts and autonomous regions.—
the administration of the laws, rules and regulations made by the District and Regional Councils;
and define the procedure to be followed by such Commission.
The report of every such Commission with the recommendations
215. Annulment or suspension of acts and resolutions of District and Regional Councils.—(1) If at any time the Governor is satisfied that an act or resolution of a District or a Regional Council is likely to endanger the safety of India 3[or is likely to be prejudicial to public order], he may annul or suspend such act or resolution and take such steps as he may consider necessary (including the suspension of the Council and the assumption to himself of all or any of the powers vested in or exercisable by the Council) to prevent the commission or continuance of such act, or the giving of effect to such resolution.
116. Dissolution of a District or a Regional Council.— 2[(1)] The Governor may on the recommendation of a Commission appointed under paragraph 14 of this Schedule by public notification order the dissolution of a District or a Regional Council, and—
which the administration of an autonomous district or region cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of this Schedule, he may, by public notification, assume to himself all or any of the functions or powers vested in or exercisable by the District Council or, as the case may be, the Regional Council and declare that such functions or powers shall be exercisable by such person or authority as he may specify in this behalf, for a period not exceeding six months:
‘(4) As soon as possible after the commencement of this Act and Interim Executive Council for Bodoland Territorial Areas District in Assam shall be formed by the Governor from amongst leaders of the Bodo movement, including the signatories to the Memorandum of Settlement, and shall provide adequate representation to the non-tribal communities in that area:
the continuance of any laws, made by the Mizo District Council and in force immediately before its dissolution, subject to such adaptations and modifications, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as the Administrator may make in this behalf, until such laws are altered, repealed or amended by a competent Legislature or other competent authority;
the continuance of any laws made by the existing Regional Council and in force immediately before the prescribed date, subject to such adaptations and modifications, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as the Administrator may make in this behalf until such laws are altered, repealed or amended by a competent Legislature or other competent authority;
Powers, privileges and immunities of each House of Parliament and of the members and the Committees of each House; enforcement of attendance of persons for giving evidence or producing documents before committees of Parliament or commissions appointed by Parliament.
The Madras Public Trusts (Regulation of Administration of Agricultural Lands) Act, 1961 (Madras Act LVII of 1961).
The West Bengal Land Reforms Tribunal Act, 1991 (West Bengal Act 12 of 1991).]
if he votes or abstains from voting in such House contrary to any direction issued by the political party to which he belongs or by any person or authority authorised by it in this behalf, without obtaining, in either case, the prior permission of such political party, person or authority and such voting or abstention has not been condoned by such political party, person or authority within fifteen days from the date of such voting or abstention.
the report which the leader of a legislature party in relation to a member of a House shall furnish with regard to any condonation of the nature referred to in clause (b) of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 in respect of such member, the time within which and the authority to whom such report shall be furnished;