Conduct of Government Business
Conduct of business of the Government of India.
Conduct of Business
Regulation by law of procedure in Parliament in relation to financial business.
Conduct of Government Business
Conduct of Business
Taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments.
Power to carry on trade, etc.
TRADE, COMMERCE AND INTERCOURSE WITHIN THE TERRITORY OF INDIA
(g) to practise any profession, or to carry on any occupation, trade or business.
the professional or technical qualifications necessary for practising any profession or carrying on any occupation, trade or business; or
to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional diversities; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women;
Conduct of Government Business
The President shall make rules for the more convenient transaction of the business of the Government of India, and for the allocation among Ministers of the said business.
The words "and for the precedence of such discussion over other business of the House" omitted by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 18-6-1951).
Conduct of Business
Regulation by law of procedure in Parliament in relation to financial business.— Parliament may, for the purpose of the timely completion of financial business, regulate by law the procedure of, and the conduct of business in, each House of Parliament in relation to any financial matter or to any Bill for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India, and, if and so far as any provision of any law so made is inconsistent with any rule made by a House of Parliament under clause (1) of article 118 or with any rule or standing order having effect in relation to Parliament under clause (2) of that article, such provision shall prevail.
anything in Part XVII, but subject to the provisions of article 348, business in Parliament shall be transacted in Hindi or in English:
Provided that one of the eminent person shall be nominated from amongst the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes, Minorities or Women:
Conduct of Government Business
The words "and for the precedence of such discussion over other business of the House" omitted by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 18-6-1951).
Conduct of Business
4[224. Appointment of additional and acting Judges.—(1) If by reason of any temporary increase in the business of a High Court or by reason
a Panchayat at the intermediate level or district level shall be elected by, and from amongst, the elected members thereof.
members of such Committee shall be elected by, and from amongst, the elected members of the Panchayat at the district level and of the Municipalities in the district in proportion to the ratio between the population of the rural areas and of the urban areas in the district;
Provided that not less than two-thirds of the members of such Committee shall be elected by, and from amongst, the elected members of the Municipalities and Chairpersons of the Panchayats in the Metropolitan area in proportion to the ratio between the population of the Municipalities and of the Panchayats in that area;
Provided also that in case of a co-operative society carrying on the business of banking, the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949) shall also apply:
The Members of the Goods and Services Tax Council referred to in sub-clause (c) of clause (2) shall, as soon as may be, choose one amongst themselves to be the Vice-Chairperson of the Council for such period as they may decide.
consumed in the construction, maintenance or operation of any railway by the Government of India or a railway company operating that railway, or sold to that Government or any such railway company for consumption in the construction, maintenance or operation of any railway,
and any such law imposing, or authorising the imposition of, a tax on the sale of electricity shall secure that the price of electricity sold to the Government of India for consumption by that Government, or to any such railway company as aforesaid for consumption in the construction, maintenance or operation of any railway, shall be less by the amount of the tax than the price charged to other consumers of a substantial quantity of electricity.
Nothing in clause (2) shall apply to any trade or business, or to any class of trade or business, which Parliament may by law declare to be incidental to the ordinary functions of Government.
TRADE, COMMERCE AND INTERCOURSE WITHIN THE TERRITORY OF INDIA
Freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse.—Subject to the other provisions of this Part, trade, commerce and intercourse throughout the territory of India shall be free.
(Part XIII.—Trade, Commerce and Intercourse within the Territory of India)
the procedure and conduct of business of the regional council;
 Now five lakh rupees, vide the Finance Act, 2018 (13 of 2018), s. 137. (w.e.f. 1-1-2016).
regulate the carrying on of business as money-lender by persons who lend money to members of the Scheduled Tribes in such area.
“Provided that the Bodoland Territorial Council shall consist of not more than forty-six members of whom forty shall be elected on the basis of adult suffrage, of whom thirty shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes, five for non-tribal communities, five open for all communities and the remaining six shall be nominated by the Governor having same rights and privileges as other members, including voting rights, from amongst the un-represented communities of the Bodoland Territorial Areas District, of which at least two shall be women:”
the procedure and the conduct of business 1[(including the power to act notwithstanding any vacancy)] in the District and Regional Councils;
the formation of subordinate local Councils or Boards and their procedure and the conduct of their business; and
Provided that until rules are made by the District or the Regional Council under this sub-paragraph the rules made by the Governor under sub-paragraph (6) of this paragraph shall have effect in respect of elections to, the officers and staff of, and the procedure and the conduct of business in, each such Council.
trade and commerce in, and the production supply and distribution of, food stuffs, cattle fodder, raw cotton and raw jute;
taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments;
prescribe that no one except the holder of a licence issued in that behalf shall carry on the business of money-lending;
prescribe that no person who is not a member of the Scheduled Tribes resident in the district shall carry on wholesale or retail business in any commodity except under a licence issued in that behalf by the District Council:
"(d) prescribe that no person resident in the district shall carry on any trade, whether wholesale or retail, except under a licence issued in that behalf by the District Council:”.
Provided further that it shall not be competent under any such regulations to refuse the grant of a licence to a money-lender or a trader who has been carrying on business within the district since before the time of the making of such regulations.
Diplomatic, consular and trade representation.
Trade and commerce with foreign countries; import and export across customs frontiers; definition of customs frontiers.
Incorporation, regulation and winding up of trading corporations, including banking, insurance and financial corporations, but not including co-operative societies.
Banking.
Patents, inventions and designs; copyright; trade-marks and merchandise marks.
Institutions for scientific or technical education financed by the Government of India wholly or in part and declared by Parliament by law to be institutions of national importance.
Taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments.
2[33. Trade and commerce in, and the production, supply and distribution of,—
The Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 (Central Act 54 of 1969).
The General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 (Central Act 57 of 1972).
The Alcock Ashdown Company Limited (Acquisition of Under- takings) Act, 1973 (Central Act 56 of 1973).
 Rep. by the Competition Act, 2002 (12 of 2003) s. 66 (w.e.f. 1-9-2009).