Protection of certain rights regarding freedom of speech, etc.
Protection of life and personal liberty. 21A.	Right to education.
Protection against arrest and detention in certain cases.
Protection of monuments and places and objects of national importance.
[314.	Provision for protection of existing officers of certain services.
Protection of President and Governors and Rajpramukhs.
Protection of certain rights regarding freedom of speech, etc.—
Protection of life and personal liberty.—No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by law.
Protection against arrest and detention in certain cases.—(1) No person who is arrested shall be detained in custody without being informed, as soon as may be, of the grounds for such arrest nor shall he be denied the right to consult, and to be defended by, a legal practitioner of his choice.
Protection of monuments and places and objects of national
those safeguards and other measures for the protection, welfare and socio-economic development of the Scheduled Castes 1***; and
to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare and development and advancement of the Scheduled Castes 1*** as the President may, subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, by rule specify.
to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare and development and advancement of the Scheduled Tribes as the President may, subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, by rule specify.
to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare and development and advancement of the socially and educationally backward classes as the President may, subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, by rule specify.
preservation, protection and improvement of stock and prevention of animal diseases; veterinary training and practice; cattle pounds;
agriculture, including agricultural education and research, protection against pests and prevention of plant diseases;
flood control schemes for protection of villages, paddy fields, markets, towns, etc. (not of technical nature);
Agriculture, including agricultural education and research, protection against pests and prevention of plant diseases.
Preservation, protection and improvement of stock and prevention of animal diseases; veterinary training and practice.
17B. Protection of wild animals and birds.]
The Madras Cultivating Tenants Protection Act, 1955 (Madras Act XXV of 1955).
The Madras Occupants of Kudiyiruppu (Protection from Eviction) Act, 1961 (Madras Act XXXVIII of 1961).
The Goa, Daman and Diu Mundkars (Protection from Eviction) Act, 1975 (Goa, Daman and Diu Act 1 of 1976).