Protection of interests of minorities.
Right of minorities to establish and administer educational institutions.
350B.	Special Officer for linguistic minorities.
religion.—No person shall be compelled to pay any taxes, the proceeds of which are specifically appropriated in payment of expenses for the promotion or maintenance of any particular religion or religious denomination.
Protection of interests of minorities.—(1) Any section of the citizens residing in the territory of India or any part thereof having a distinct language, script or culture of its own shall have the right to conserve the same.
Right of minorities to establish and administer educational institutions.—(1) All minorities, whether based on religion or language, shall have the right to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice.
the members of the Forces charged with the maintenance of public order; or
be restricted or abrogated so as to ensure the proper discharge of their duties and the maintenance of discipline among them.]
has been for at least five years a Judge of a High Court or of two or more such Courts in succession; or
has been for at least ten years an advocate of a High Court or of two or more such Courts in succession; or
1*** or of two or more such Courts in succession.2***
350B. Special Officer for linguistic minorities.—(1) There shall be a Special Officer for linguistic minorities to be appointed by the President.
Each District Council and each Regional Council shall be a body corporate by the name respectively of “the District Council of (name of district)” and “the Regional Council of (name of region)”, shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
minor irrigation;
supply; (ix) forests (other than reserved forests); (x) handloom and textile; (xi) health and family welfare, (xii) intoxicating liquors, opium and derivatives, subject to the provisions of entry 84 of List I of the Seventh Schedule; (xiii) irrigation; (xiv) labour and employment;
the appointment or succession of Chiefs or Headmen;
2[(i) marriage and divorce;]
taxes for the maintenance of schools, dispensaries or roads;
provide for the maintenance of accounts by money-lenders and for the inspection of such accounts by officers appointed in that behalf by the District Council;
Land revenue, including the assessment and collection of revenue, the maintenance of land records, survey for revenue purposes and records of rights, and alienation of revenues.
Duties in respect of succession to agricultural land.
1[20A. Population control and family planning.]
the maintenance of registers or other records as to the political parties, if any, to which different members of the House belong;
Minor	irrigation,	water	management	and	watershed development.
Minor forest produce.
Family welfare.
Maintenance of community assets.]