Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment.
Prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour.
Prohibition of employment of children in factories, etc.
Living wage, etc., for workers.
43A.	Participation of workers in management of Industries. 43B.	Promotion of co-operative societies.
Prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour.—(1)
Prohibition of employment of children in factories, etc.—No child below the age of fourteen years shall be employed to work in any factory or mine or engaged in any other hazardous employment.
any land held or let for purposes of agriculture or for purposes ancillary thereto, including waste land, forest land, land for pasture or sites of buildings and other structures occupied by cultivators of land, agricultural labourers and village artisans;]
Provided that a Municipality under this clause may not be constituted in such urban area or part thereof as the Governor may, having regard to the size of the area and the municipal services being provided or proposed to be provided by an industrial establishment in that area and such other factors as he may deem fit, by public notification, specify to be an industrial township.
engages during his term of office in any paid employment outside the duties of his office; or
industrial and labour disputes;
social security and social insurance; employment and unemployment;
the transfer or re-employment of any employees of the existing Regional Council to or by the corresponding new District Council, the terms and conditions of service applicable to such employees after such transfer or re-employment;
Regulation of labour and safety in mines and oilfields.
Commercial and industrial monopolies, combines and trusts.
Social security and social insurance; employment and unemployment.
1[25. Education, including technical education, medical education and universities, subject to the provisions of entries 63, 64, 65 and 66 of List I; vocational and technical training of labour.]
The Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 1976 (Central Act 19 of 1976).
The Kerala Agricultural Workers Act, 1974 (Kerala Act 18 of 1974).
Water supply for domestic, industrial and commercial purposes.